Muse Sexual nas Ercolas
Nao da pata aceitar Reorama escola livre Ho SIDA

Republica de Mogambique
Inglés Ministério da Educagao 1* Epoca
10° Classe / 2012 Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias 90 Minutos

Esta prova contém 26 perguntas. Leia-a com aten¢éo e responda na sua folha de exame.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Women play an important role in Mozambique. They do a lot to build our nation. Many women in our
country have important jobs. They work as nurses, doctors, journalists, soldiers and teachers.
During the liberation struggle, women took part in many important activities. Some prepared food for the
fighters and others worked as radio operators, teachers and nurses.
In our traditional societies, women were exploited by men. Man used to have many wives. They used them to
work in their fields. The more women a man had, the richer he became. As the men became richer, the
women became poorer.
The women worked hard, from morning till evening. They came home and they still had to prepare the meal
for the family. They also had to fetch water. Women had to eat last. When there wasn’t enough food, they
had to go to bed hungry.
At the time, women could not speak out. They were not allowed to make decisions. The men made all
decisions for them. For example, women were not allowed to speak in court. They had to be presented by
men. They could not speak in public either.
Now all is different, men and women share the same rights. Women do have the voice in society and they
cannot be used by men any more. In our country, women have an organization called the “Organization of
Mozambican Women” (OMM), one of the aims of this organization is to stop men from exploiting women
and to fight against bad traditions which make women inferior.

Adapted from English 9, page 59. Texto Editora

Glossary

struggle - luta, batalha whether- se till - até

fighters - lutadores allowed- permetido enough - suficiente
1. What is the role of women in Mozambique?

2. Mention two aspects from the text that confirm women exploitation by men.

3. Are women still exploited? Why?

4. What organization stands for women in Mozambique?

5. In one or two sentences write the main idea of the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

A. something C. any D. lots of
7. José Mourinho is one of ----------- coaches in the world.

A. better B. best C. most D. the best
8. One night Ben and ----------- went to Zimpeto Stadium, but we were late.

A. mine B. yours C. me D.I

Please turn the paper over


2012/10" Classe/Exame de Inglés/ 1° Epoca

9. Lopened the window ---------------- let the smoke out of my room.
A. because B. in order to C. or D. when
10. Rivers and seas in the world are ---------------- polluted.
A. come B. came C. coming D. being
11. Could I ---------------- earlier tomorrow?
A. to leave B. left C. leaving D. leave
12. Nigeria ---------------- basketball competition in the Olympic African Games, in Maputo, in 2011.
A. win B. wins C. to win D. won
13. He has ---------------- time to spend with his family.
A. few B. much C. many D. more
14, ---------------- much water in the tank.
A. There are B. There is C. There were D. There weren’t
15. Mozambique is ---------------- on the South eastern coast of Africa.
A. lived B. situated C. stayed D. punished

Section III: In the following text some words have been left out. From the words given below the text,
select the one that best completes each space. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Maimuna Manjate, a local farmer in Mandimba, is a very happy---16---as her idea of community savings has
helped many---17---in her village. It all started as a---18---five years ago when she lent some potato---19---to
her neighbour and received double of what she had lent after harvesting. After a couple of---20---, she
decided to organize her---21---savings into a well-structured---22---that even lent out money.

Each---23---of the group gets according to what they contributed. This way they managed to buy modern
farming---24---like tractors, potato plants and irrigation pipes. Last year, they won a silver medal at an
agricultural show in Lilongwe. Their---25---is to empower women so they can be economically stable.

16. A man B woman Cc. child D women

17. A farmers B_ animals C plants D_ doctors

18. A ceremony B_ Joke C problem D_ weeding
19. A product B _ fertilizer C plants D money

20. A seasons B centuries C_ decades D_ millennium
21. A division B orbit C planet D community
22. A member B_ group C person D people

23. A regiment B together C member D group

24. A shorts B shirts C __ trousers D equipments
25. A dream B histories C stale D fables

Section 4: Writing (There are 5 marks for this section)

26. In about 150 words, write a composition about how women are treated in your community.
Do not sign your composition.
THE END


