Abuse Seral nas Escolas
Nao dé para aceltar R Poruma escola livre de SIDA

Republica de Mogambique
Ministério da Educagao e Desenvolvimento Humano

Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificacao e Equivaléncias
ESG / 2017 2* Epoca

10* Classe Exame de Lingua Inglesa 90 Minutos

:

\ Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-as com atengiio e responda na sua folha de exame.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Intensive cultivation has obliged farmers and farming companies to make use of products that can rapidly
and efficiently replace the nutrients in soils that plants feed on.

Fertilizers can act directly on the plants, providing them with large quantities of nutrients or, they can act
indirectly by penetrating the soil and reaching it. Manure is one of the products that farmers use to improve
soil quality. Manure has high content of nutrients (macronutrients) that are directly used by the plants. It
allows for more absorption of nutrients which help plants grow faster and bigger.

Apart from manure, farmers also use pesticides for improved yields. For better growth of the plants and high
productivity, it is important to protect the plants from pests and diseases.

There are many pests known by human kind ever since the Egyptians started recording the events of the
Earth in writing. For instance, locusts have swarmed fields and devastated entire countries such as Egypt,
Chad, Mauritania and some Southern Africa countries near Mozambique. Other pests include termites, rats,
flies, several species of insects, ants, bugs and lice. All these pests can be controlled with pesticides and
biological mechanisms. Every pest has its own natural enemies, it helps fields to keep free from them.

Adapted
Glossary
Sarmers - agricultores manure - estrume yield - produgao
fields - campos agricolas human kind - espécie humana fertilizers - fertilizantes

1. What is the role of fertilizers on plants?

2. What do farmers use to improve the quality of the soil?

3. Why is it important to protect plants from pests and diseases?
4. How can pests be controlled?

5, In one or two sentences, write the overall idea of the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words that best fill the gap in each of the following sentences.
Write the letter (A, B, C or D) only. (There are 10 marks for this section)

6. Lurdes Mutola became the most ------ Mozambican athlete in the 800 metres running events.
A good B_ happy C successful D taller
7. When I do a test, I always answer the questions ------,
A always B_ carefully C headily D_ never
8. They never go to ------ cinema these days.
Aa B an C or D the
9. My community is ------ in the district.
A educated B moreeducated © C most educated D the most educated

Please turn the paper over


2017/10" Classe/Exame de Lingua Inglesa/2" Epoca

10. These tablets ------ to relieve the pain when you get sick.

A help B_ helped C helping D helps
11, They will study medicine ------ accountancy. .

A although B but C or D so
12. They said that they live ------ the school.

A between B_ during C snear D on
13, A meal ------ by the students, everyday.

A are had B has had C ishad D were had
14. Young people ------ to listen to old people.

A can B_ ought C_ shouldn’t D will
15. One of the best ways to avoid getting HIV is the use of ------.

A antiretroviral B antivirus C condoms D glasses
16, Please, can I borrow your ------ to rub out this sentence?

A board B_ book C eraser D_ pencil
17. My aunt works in a small ------ in Maputo city.

A country B factory C sky D water
18. Firemen use ------ to fight the fire.

A fire B petrol C wind D water
19. There is a good ------coming from the kitchen. They are baking a cake.

A flavour B_ noise C. smell D voice
20, ------ is a two-wheeled vehicle that you sit on and move by turning the two pedals.

A Bicycle B_ Perambulator C Trolley D_ Wheelbarrow
21. I bought two ------ for the show.

A newspapers B letters C_ passports D tickets
22. Mr. Abreu piloted the ------ so well and it landed safely.

A car B bike C plane D_ wheel
23, ------ is a crime in Republic of Mozambique.

A Cooking B_ Gambling C Hunting D Poaching
24. The last ------ was scored by Dominguez.

A corner B goal C ground D_net
25. All these are diseases EXCEPT...

A cough. B cholera. C favour. D_ malaria.

Section IV: Writing (There are 5 marks for this section)
26. In about 150 words, write a composition about the effects of floods in Mozambique.

Do not sign your composition.

THE END


