uso Serual was Escolar
Nao da para aceitar Re uma escola livre do SIDA

Republica de Mogambique
Ministério da Educacao
Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias

ESG / 2013 Exame de Inglés 1° Epoca
10° Classe 120 Minutos

Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Responda-as na sua folha de respostas.
Em cada seccao esta indicada, entre parénteses a cotacao.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

The Amazon forest, in Brazil, covers five million square kilometres-an area as big as the whole Europe
excluding Russia. It contains one third of the world’s trees.

However, the trees are disappearing. By 1974, a quarter of the forest had already been cut down. In the
following year, 1975, 4% of the remaining trees were also cut down. If the destruction of the forest continues
at the same rate, there will be nothing left by the year 2020.

Scientists say that the disappearance of the trees is already causing changes in the climate. In Peru, there is
less snow than before on the high peaks of the Andes Mountains. In Bolivia, there is less rain than before and
more wind. In some parts of North-east Brazil there is now very little rain.

What will happen if more of the Amazon forest is cut down? According to climatologists, two things are
likely to happen: there will be serious effects on the world’s climate, and the air that we breathe will lose
some of its oxygen.

Trees absorb the gas carbon dioxide from the air, and give out oxygen into the air. The trees of the Amazon
rain forest are chemically very active, and some scientists believe that they provide 50% of the world’s
annual production of oxygen. If we lose the tropical forests, the air will contain less oxygen and more carbon
dioxide. It will become difficult-perhaps even impossible-to breathe.

With more carbon dioxide in the air, the temperature will rise, the ice-caps at the North and South poles will
melt, the sea level will rise, and hundreds of coastal cities will become flooded.

Scientists do not all agree about the exact figures-the calculations can be done in different ways with
different results. But all scientists agree that if we destroy the Amazon forest it will be environmental

suicide-like losing an ocean. Life on Earth will become difficult, and it may become impossible.
Adapted from “the Cambridge English Course” p.77 (Michel swan &Catherine walker, 1989)

Glossary
snow - neve, nevada melt - derreter, fundir Earth - terra, globo terrestre
breathe - respirar ice-caps - camadas de gelo absorb - absorver, incorporar

1. What is happening in the Amazon forest?

2. What will happen according to the climatologists?

3. Why is the Amazon forest important to the World?

4. What will happen in the World with more carbon dioxide in the air?
5. Give a title to the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. There ------ many students in my class.
A is B_ be C are D am
Please turn the paper over


7. All these are adjectives EXCEPT ------ .

2013/10" Classe/Exame de Inglés/1* Epoca

A beautiful B_ big Cs talk D tall
8. How do you ------ the rest of the family?

A treated B treat Cis treat D treating
9. Manuel always ------ mapiko in the afternoon.

A dance B dances C dancing D_ will dance
10. Marrabenta ------ in the province of Maputo.

A do origin B originate C_ originated D_ will originate
11. Liicia is ------ than Maria.

A short Bs shorter C_ shortest D the shortest
12. Last year, journalists ------ a lot of photos in the independence day.

A has taken Bis taking C_ takes D_ took
13. Girls nowadays have ------ right to go to school.

Aa B an C the D this
14. Japan and India ------ thousands of cars last year.

A did B do C made D_= make
15. Our teacher will be ------ if we do not do the homework.

A hungry B_ angry C ugly D_ handsome

Section III: In the following text some words have been left out. From the words given below the text,
select the one that best completes each space. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

When men were still hunters, and people lived in caves, it was very difficult for them to cross ---- 16 ----.
They had to swim or walk across at a ---- 17 ---- where the water was shallow (a drift). They could easily
throw a big ---- 18 ---- into the water, and step from one stone to another without wetting their ---- 19 ----.
These are stepping stones. You may have used them yourself when crossing a ---- 20 ----. We can guess that

a ---- 21 ---- sometimes cut down a
to cross. Many kinds of swinging ---- 23
- to make the great suspension bridges of ---- 25 ----.

16. A_ rivers B paths Cc
17. A country B_ place Cc
18. A steam B wound Cc
19. A feet B figures Cc
20. A ocean B_ water Cc
21. <A people B children Cc
22. A plants B tree Cc
23. <A. street B_ houses Cc
24. A idea B feeling Cc
25. A phenomenon B_ today Cc

water
farm
bullet
names
stream
man

life

shop
sentence
house

Section IV: Writing (There are 5 marks for this section)
26. In about 150 words, write a composition about how to prevent HIV/AIDS.

Do not sign your composition

THE END

22 ---- in such a way that it fell across the river or stream he wanted
were built in early times. Modern man has copied this ---- 24 ---

forest
yard
stone
foot
village
girls
roots
bridges
word
building

sesvrrrcey


