*
e

Reoramasscota roto sia
Inglés Republica de Mocambique 1° Epoca
10° Classe / 2005 Ministério da Educagio e Cultura 90 Minutos

Section I: Read the following text and then answer the questions below according to the
information given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section.)

In the humid tropical regions of the world, there is no country where the coconut has not been planted
either for the market or for subsistence. Mozambique is the largest coconut producer in Africa and
coconuts are an important export product. The palm mainly grows in coastal regions of the provinces of
Zambezia and Inhambane. Some of the largest single plantations in the world are to be found here.

The coconut has eared its name “tree of life” through its many useful products. There are hardly any
parts of the palm that are left unused.

The dried flesh of the coconut itself is called copra. The oil that is produced from copra is the most
important single product of the tree. For many years it has been important cooking oil and is used in the
manufacture of margarine. In recent years it has been widely used as an ingredient in sweets. Apart from
its use as a food product, coconut oil has a wide range of applications as an industrial vegetable oil, for
example in soaps and other cleansing agents as well as cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, explosives and paints.

The flesh of the coconut can also be dried and grated to produce desiccated coconut, which is used in the
manufacture of cakes and sweets.

The shell of the coconut can be used as a domestic fuel for cooking and for making charcoal.

The leaves of the coconut are widely used for domestic purposes such as mats. They can also be used as a
roofing material.

People enjoy eating the flesh of the coconut, which is considered a great delicacy; however, it is an
expensive vegetable since the whole tree has to be destroyed to obtain one flesh.

Glossary
mainly - principalmente grated - ralado charcoal - carvao

shell - casca/concha desiceated - dissecado _mats - esteiras

widely - extremamente earned - ganhou roofing material - material de cobertura de casas
flesh - polpa

In what places can palm grow?

Why is coconut called the “tree of life”?

. Name four (4) applications of the coconut.

What can the leaves be used for?

In one or two sentences write the overall idea of the text.

yan

Section II: Choose the word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fills the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section.)

6. There was -----------+- food in the fridge.
A. little B.a few C. many D. lots
7. Weare going away a few days.
A. of B.at C. for D. by
8. Do you have --. -- phone number?
A. mine B. my C. hers D. its
9. --- can speak six languages.
B. what C. whom D. who
--- clean the office tomorrow.
A. will B. shall be C.is D. won’t

Cont.

std WG
21 June 2008 12:5254

*\¢


2005/10° Classe/Inglés/ 1*Epoca

11. The weather was bad ----.

---- we were on holiday.

A. however B. yet C. when D. during
12. We were not hungry, so we did not cat --—--------+-- s
A. something B. anything C. anybody D. somebody
13. Ifa shopkeeper ------------ a mistake and gave you too much money, what would you do?
B. making C. is making D. make
--- to the cinema recently.
B. be C. been D. is been
- than his elder sister.
B. younger than C. youngest D. younger

Section III: In the following passage some words have been left out. From the words given below
the text, select the one that best completes each space. (There are 5 marks for this
section.)

The ancient Egyptians lived in cities and towns along the river Nile. Children played by the river.
Mothers washed the --- 16 --- in the river. People travelled from place to --- 17 --- by boat. Everything
depended on the river Nile.

These --- 18 --- Egyptians had many temples and statues in their --- 19 --- and towns. These statues and
temples were important to the --- 20 ---,

Then in 1960, the Egyptian government decided to build a --- 21 --- in Aswan. More than 35,000 men
worked on the dam. They started in 1960 and finished in 1970.

The Aswan Dam created the huge --- 22 --- called Nasser. Many temples and statues disappeared under
the --- 23 ---, The government moved two famous --- 24 --- to a safe place away from the lake. These
were the temples of Ramses II.

25 --- helped to move the temples. They numbered each stone. The archeologists wanted the temples
to look exactly as they did originally.

16.A. address B. top C. fashion D. clothes
17.A. home B. cave C. house D. place
18.A. researches B. ancestors C. ancient D. relative
19.A. neighbours B. cities C. countryside D. yards
20.A. people B. citizen C. guest D. animals
21.A. line B. bridges C. dam D. houses
22.A. bay B. lake C. river D. ocean
23.A. water B. vapour C. air D. space
24.A. figure B. sculpture C. statue D. temples
25.A. Doctors B. Archeologists C. Nurses D. Patients

Section IV: Writing (There are 5 marks for this section.)

Imagine that you were taking an adverts course and you want to put everything you learned during your
course into practice. Write 2 composition of 120 to 150 advertising any of the products you want to sell in,
your little business. Use the following words to help you (sell, good quality, cheap, paying facilities,
location, prices, fashion, nice colours, etc).

Do not sign your composition.

THE END

std WG
21 June 2005 12:3256

\°FTo



