Exame de Lingua Inglesa

Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-as co!

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information given in
the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

From the north to the south of Mozambique there’s no women who doesn’t wear a capulana, They wear it as
an everyday cloth, to clean and wrap around children, to bind them to their back or as a towel and a curtain;
when changing house and traveling they use it to wrap their belongings. But not only countrywomen use
them, as one might imagine. Urban women too, who usually dress in a more western style, invariably wear it
when they are around home or at certain family ceremonies. Other women in Africa use the same kind of
rectangular cotton cloth, which more recently comes in a blend of synthetic fibres, with large printed motifs
(including the faces of presidents) and in bold colours. Women and girls covered with these coloured fabrics
bring life and colour to the country roads that criss-cross the monotonous savannah landscape or the streets
and markets of the noisy, chaotic African towns.

These clothes have other names in different countries. In Kenya they are called kanga. In west Africa, in
Congo and Senegal, they are called pagne.

Many Mozambican languages have vernacular names for them. But capulana is the most common name,
used from north to the south, and east to the west in Mozambique. One of the first explanations we came
across was that it comes from ka polana, which means “place of chief Polana”, that today is part of the city
of Maputo. But everything suggests that the use of the capulana came from north to south; it is highly
unlikely that it would have originated in the south. Certain people trace back its origins to Portuguese
merchants, who brought it to Mombassa from the Orient; so, one way or another this might have influenced
the northern Provinces of Mozambique first, before the southern part of the country.

Glossary:
Wear - usar, vestir Wrap - embrulhar, cobrir Blend - mistura
Landscape - paisagem _ Clothes - roupas Vernacular names - nomes comuns/ correntes

1. What do women use capulana for?

2. When do women use capulana in urban areas?

3. Describe the effect of Capulana within the country.
4. Where is the name capulana used in Mozambique?

5. Give a title to the text you read.

Please turn the paper o1
of



BROT ecacomsA- 10.2010

2019 / 10" Classe / Exame de Lingua Inglesa / 1* Epoca

Section Il: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill in the gap in cach of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. Good students work

A hard B harder C hardier D hardly ;
7. Pollution is a serious issue can cause respiratory diseases.

A that B what C whom D whose
8. Cutting down trees be against the law in Mozambique.

A will B should C shouldn’t D wouldn’t
9. Cassava is mainly grown Nampula and Inhambane Provinces.

Ain B since C to D under
10. If we provide milk to schools, children will __strong.

A grew B grow C grown D grows
11. My sister hates vegetables. That’s why] ee buy vegetables.

A never B often C seldom D sometimes
12. People do speak English in the world.

A. Any B Little C Many D Much
13. We wouldn’t have gone by train if you ___ money for the plane.

A had B hadn’t C has D have
14. __She arrived later, she finished her English test on time.

—A Although B And C However D Or

15. What kind of music do you like? _____like Pandza and Dzukuta.

A He BI C They D You
16. Longago, some people used__———_to send specific messages to their communities.

A drums B fruit C moon D water
17. The pe ee lives where there is water.

A birds B butterfly C grasshopper D hippopotamus.
isseow many 3 are there in the classroom?

A sky B desks C tree D clouds
19. All grade 10 students have towrite_ by the end of the year.

A exams B keys C milks D rubbers

20. Some experts say that people should be taught about natural ___at school.

A bottles B computer C disasters D television
21. A nurse works at the hospital. She gives a patient an ae

A chalk B injection C money D mouse
22. People kill the rhinoceros because they wantits =

A belt B book C food % D horns
23. I think ___ tree is basically the same in Mozambique and Angola.

A bed B family C radio D spoon
24. Footballers and dancers usually havealotof Ss movements.

A body B flower C glass D tea
25. You shouldn’t smoke - it’s bad for your iz

A dishes B health D table

Section III: Writing ( There are 5 marks for this section) d ele
Choose a profession that you would like to have when you finish school and write a composition in about 200
words. Describe it: say what it consists of, how important it is for the development of our country.

Do not sign your composition

THE END

a _ ” a



