Exame de Lingua Inglesa

Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-as co!

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information given in
the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

From the north to the south of Mozambique there’s no women who doesn’t wear a capulana, They wear it as
an everyday cloth, to clean and wrap around children, to bind them to their back or as a towel and a curtain;
when changing house and traveling they use it to wrap their belongings. But not only countrywomen use
them, as one might imagine. Urban women too, who usually dress in a more western style, invariably wear it
when they are around home or at certain family ceremonies. Other women in Africa use the same kind of
rectangular cotton cloth, which more recently comes in a blend of synthetic fibres, with large printed motifs
(including the faces of presidents) and in bold colours. Women and girls covered with these coloured fabrics
bring life and colour to the country roads that criss-cross the monotonous savannah landscape or the streets
and markets of the noisy, chaotic African towns.

These clothes have other names in different countries. In Kenya they are called kanga. In west Africa, in
Congo and Senegal, they are called pagne.

Many Mozambican languages have vernacular names for them. But capulana is the most common name,
used from north to the south, and east to the west in Mozambique. One of the first explanations we came
across was that it comes from ka polana, which means “place of chief Polana”, that today is part of the city
of Maputo. But everything suggests that the use of the capulana came from north to south; it is highly
unlikely that it would have originated in the south. Certain people trace back its origins to Portuguese
merchants, who brought it to Mombassa from the Orient; so, one way or another this might have influenced
the northern Provinces of Mozambique first, before the southern part of the country.

Glossary:
Wear - usar, vestir Wrap - embrulhar, cobrir Blend - mistura
Landscape - paisagem _ Clothes - roupas Vernacular names - nomes comuns/ correntes

1. What do women use capulana for?

2. When do women use capulana in urban areas?

3. Describe the effect of Capulana within the country.
4. Where is the name capulana used in Mozambique?

5. Give a title to the text you read.

Please turn the paper o1
of

