Reeramsescotanra ww sin

@

Repiblica de Mocambique

Inglés inistério da Educacfo e Cultura Pa Epoca
10° Classe / 2009 Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias 90 Minutos

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Slaves were brought to Africa in the 1670s. They were usually men and came mainly from the East Indies,
but also from east and West Africa. Slaves had to work without pay for the person who owned them. They
were mainly used for manual labour in the Cape, although many slaves were skilled workers as well. Manual
labour means working with your body, doing work like digging, carrying heavy things, or washing dishes.
Skilled workers can do things that need knowledge and skill, such as sewing, woodwork, cooking and
farming, Slavery was only abolished in South Africa in 1834.
‘The arrival of these farmers made a big difference to the people who were already in the area. The Khoikhoi
were stopped from using the Liesbeek River, which were their most valuable grazing land and water source.
A long wooden fence, made from thousands of trees, was built to stop them going into the area claimed by
the Dutch.
This was the very first time in. Southern Africa that laws were made to mark off land and give it to one
person to own. These laws also affected how people lived in the Liesbeek valley. The Khoikhoi would have
found this idea as crazy as we would if we tried to mark out a portion of the sky for our own private use.

Tn Successful Human and Social Sciences

Glossary

slaves — escravos laws — leis grazing ~ pastar
brought — trazidos dig - cavar * source — fonte
labour — trabalho heavy - pesado

skilled — habilitados/ter muita forga arrival - chegada

1. When did the slaves first come to Africa?

2. What were the slaves used for?

3. Did they get any salaries?

4. What changes did the laws make to the Khoikhoi people?

5. In one or two sentences, write the most important ideas of the text.

Section Il: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
foliowing sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. [have ------------ friends in South Asia.
A.a little B. lot C. lots of D. much

7. In my University ----

-- some foreign students.

A. has B. have C. there are D. there is
8. We must save ---------- money to buy a new bicycle for John.
A. any B. few C.no D. some

)

hs -- is your telephone number?
A. How B. What C. When D. Who
Please turn the paper over
