Abuse Sexual aas Escolas
Nao da para aceitar Rew uma escola livre do SIDA

Reptiblica de Mocambique
Ministério da Educagao
Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias

ESG / 2016 Exame da Lingua Inglesa 1° Epoca
10° Classe 90 Minutos

Esta prova contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Responda-as na sua folha de respostas.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

The development of science and technology has brought new developments in the area of medicine.
An important development in medicine was the invention of anesthesia. According to the history of
medicine, many years ago, if one was to go for a surgery operation, this person had to be beaten with a
hammer to faint. They, then would operate on him/her. It was painful and risky since in some occasions
patients never recovered from the fainting! Nowadays, before any surgery the person gets an injection of
anesthesia, whichmakes him/her feel nothing during the surgery. It is easier than the hammer method!
Modern medicines also invented incubators. Incubators are small containers used for keeping premature
babies alive. Many years ago, if children were born prematurely, they died, because of lack of medical aid.
Nowadays, if a child is born prematurely, he/she is put in an incubator, an environment close to his/her
mother’s womb.
Another important development in medicine was the invention of vaccination. Modern vaccines can
prevent diseases through vaccination. Many diseases like polio and small pox have been eradicated because
of vaccination. In Mozambique there are many vaccination campaign against different diseases like
malaria.

Adapted Inglés 9a Classe

Glossary
Anesthesia — anesthesia Faint - desmaiar Small pox - variola
Surgery — cirurgia Painful — doloroso Womb — ventre

1.What was the important invention in medicine in the surgery area.
2.What used to be done before a surgery operation many years ago?
3.Why did the children born prematurely die many years ago?
4.What diseases were eradicated by vaccination?

5.Give a suitable title to the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. I saw Steve ------ the concert on Sunday.
A at B_ for C in D to

7. She insisted ----- doing it all by herself.

A at B_ for C in D on
8. The bus service is very good. There is a bus ----- ten minutes.
A at Beach C_severy D_ some

Please turn the paper over


2016/10" Classe/Exame da Lingua Inglesa/ 1" Epoca

9. How ------ sugar do you need.

A alotof B= many C much D
10. The phone is ringing. ------ T answer it?

A May B_ Might C Must D
11. Do you want - to go with you.

A me B_ mine Cc my D
12. Abel is the person ------ received the parcel.

A what B_ which C_ who D
13. Maria doesn’t speak English, ------ ?

A can she Bs can’t she C does she D
14. You’ve been to Zimbabwe, ------ 2?

A didn’t you B_haven’t you C_ isn't it D
15. If you lie in the sun for too long, you ------ sunburnt.

A. get B.sgets Csgetting D
16. People should plant ----- and fruits instead of buying them.

A books B_ bread C_eggs D
17. The most intelligent student answered all the ------ in 30 minutes.

A aims B_ answers C_ questions D
18. Mosquitoes are very dangerous because they cause ------ .

A Cancer B_ Cholera C_ HIV/AIDS D
19. Mozambican factories will need more ------ to make clothes and towels.

A copra B_ cotton C. sisal D
20. The earth is one of the ------ that exists in the universe.

A continents B planets C_ regions D
21. A ----- is a person who is employed to look after children at someone’s house.

A cook B_ nanny C nurse D

22. Last night I didn’t sleep at all. A ------ barked loudly.

A cat B_ dog C_ goat D
23. All these are university courses, EXCEPT ------. .
A archipelago B_ engineering C nutrition D

24. The football player can’t play today because she injured her ------ .

A ankle B_ eyelash Chair D
25. The antonym of far is ----- .
A cloth B furious C distant D

Section IV: Writing (There are 5 marks for this section)

some
Will

myself

whose

doesn’t she

wasn’t you

vegetable

thoughts

Malaria

wood

stars

teacher

monkey

philosophy
name

near

26. In about 150 words, write a composition about the importance of radio for your community.

Do not sign your composition

THE END


