uso Serual was Escolar
Nao dé pata aceitar SR perma escoretosin

Republica de Mogambique
Ministério da Educacao
Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagaéo e Equivaléncias

ESG / 2014 Exame de Inglés 1° Epoca
10° Classe 90 Minutos

Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-as com atencao e responda na sua folha de exame.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Agriculture plays a very important role in Mozambique. Many people in Mozambique depend directly and/or
indirectly on agriculture. There are two types of agriculture: large and small scale.
The first type employs many people and uses machinery and fertilizers. The products are mostly for export
and to sell in large quantities within the country. Some years ago, AVICOLA, a national company, was in the
chickens and broilers breeding business. This company employed many people and sold chickens and eggs
throughout Mozambique. Those who worked there earned enough money to feed themselves and to pay for
school materials for their children.
The second type of agriculture is also called “family agriculture”. This is what every family in rural areas
does. They do not use fertilizers but dung that they make from tree leaves or animal excrement. The products
harvested are for their own consumption and some to sell to get money to buy clothes, soap and some other
things they need.
In general, most products we see every day are produced by farmers and peasants. Some of those products
are: oil, milk, pasta, etc.

Adapted from Inglés 8* Classe

Glossary
Broilers — galinhas poedeiras Earned — ganharam Dung — estrume
Breeding — criacao de animais Throughout — em todo o Harvest — colher a colheita

1. What type of agriculture is practiced in Mozambique?

2. What is the destination of large scale agriculture products?
3. Where is family agriculture practiced?

4. What do peasants do with the money they earn?

5. Give a suitable title to the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. My cousin is the ------ member of the family.

A bigger B confident C_ more confident D_ most confident
7. Gina walks ------ because she has a serious leg problem.

A more slow B_ much slow C_ slower D slowly
8. All candidates must answer the questions using ------ pen.

Aa B an C at D of

Please turn the paper over


2014/10" Classe/Exame de Inglés/1* Epoca

9. I like that boy, ------ has good behaviour.
A he B it C.sshe D_ you
10. My best friend gave me some money ------ I bought these biscuits.
A and B_ because C but D so
11. My exam paper should be ------ the table.
A above B at C in D on
12. We ------ having English exam now.
A are B_ be C is D_ was
13. He will get there in time if he ...
A tan. Bruns. C_ was running. D_ will run.
14. If I won a lot of money, I ------ for all my family’s studies.
A paid B_ pay C_ will pay D_ would pay

15. One of the best ways to avoid getting cholera is the use of ...
A condoms. B glasses. C sgrass. D soap.

Section III: In the following text some words have been left out. From the words given below the text,
select the one that best completes each space. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Life on earth is full of different species. Each species is adapted to a different ---16---. All you have to do is
look around and observe.

In a forest, species specialization can be seen in the layer system of ---17--- life. Animals that live on the top
of the trees dare not come to the ground. It is too dangerous for them. Besides, all ---18--- and shelter that
they need to survive is on the top ---19--- of the forest. The same can be said about the ---20--- in the middle
layer and in the ground layer. Other species, like some type of bacteria, have to live inside the ---21--- of
other animals to survive. If they go in to the open for long, they die.

Humans, too, used to have their place in nature. They used to live in caves and feed on ---22---. However,
unlike other species, humans reasoned and wanted to change nature, they started feeding themselves from
their natural ---23---. They wanted to have a more comfortable life.

If we are careful enough to observe nature, we will see that humans are the biggest ---24--- living on earth
today. They are used to doing only what they want, and not what they must. They are not used to doing what
they ought to do in favour of life in this ---25---.

16. A environment B nationality C_ person D subject
17. A animal B forest C home D_ house
18. A comfort B_ food C importance D_ users

19. A law Bilayer C.sside D tree

20. A animals B environment C_ forest D_ ground
21. <A bodies B_ house C ilife D_ situation
22. <A bacteria B_ bread C_ plants D_ water
23. A nature B predators C_ species D_ worlds
24. A comfort B nature C_ neighbour D threat
25. <A forest B home C_ house D_ planet

Section IV: Writing. (There are 5 marks for this section)
26. In about 150 words, write a composition about the school subject or subjects you like most.
Do not sign your composition

THE END


