uso Serual was Escolar
Nao dé pata aceitar SR perma escoretosin

Republica de Mogambique
Ministério da Educacao
Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagaéo e Equivaléncias

ESG / 2014 Exame de Inglés 1° Epoca
10° Classe 90 Minutos

Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-as com atencao e responda na sua folha de exame.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Agriculture plays a very important role in Mozambique. Many people in Mozambique depend directly and/or
indirectly on agriculture. There are two types of agriculture: large and small scale.
The first type employs many people and uses machinery and fertilizers. The products are mostly for export
and to sell in large quantities within the country. Some years ago, AVICOLA, a national company, was in the
chickens and broilers breeding business. This company employed many people and sold chickens and eggs
throughout Mozambique. Those who worked there earned enough money to feed themselves and to pay for
school materials for their children.
The second type of agriculture is also called “family agriculture”. This is what every family in rural areas
does. They do not use fertilizers but dung that they make from tree leaves or animal excrement. The products
harvested are for their own consumption and some to sell to get money to buy clothes, soap and some other
things they need.
In general, most products we see every day are produced by farmers and peasants. Some of those products
are: oil, milk, pasta, etc.

Adapted from Inglés 8* Classe

Glossary
Broilers — galinhas poedeiras Earned — ganharam Dung — estrume
Breeding — criacao de animais Throughout — em todo o Harvest — colher a colheita

1. What type of agriculture is practiced in Mozambique?

2. What is the destination of large scale agriculture products?
3. Where is family agriculture practiced?

4. What do peasants do with the money they earn?

5. Give a suitable title to the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. My cousin is the ------ member of the family.

A bigger B confident C_ more confident D_ most confident
7. Gina walks ------ because she has a serious leg problem.

A more slow B_ much slow C_ slower D slowly
8. All candidates must answer the questions using ------ pen.

Aa B an C at D of

Please turn the paper over
