sana

ATLA

ea) ING-1-08-047-0801-0253

ll

Previna-se! Republica de Mocambique

Ministério da Educagao e Desenvolvimento Humano
Instituto Nacional de Exames, Certificagéo e Equivaléncias

ESG / 2020 1* Chamada

10 * Classe

90 Minutos
Exame Final de Lingua Inglesa

Esta prova contém 26 perguntas. Leia com atengio e responda na sua folha de exame.

Repo

may

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the following questions. (There are 7

marks for this section).

Population growth, urbanisation and income growth in developing countries are fuelling a
significant global increase in the demand for food of animal origin, while also aggravating the
competition between crops and livestock (increasing cropping areas and decreasing rangelands).
This means that something has to be done so as to minimise the situation. One of the ways is what
has come to be called ‘integrated crop-livestock farming’.

Integrated crop-livestock farming is the farming that involves looking for methods that aim at
producing enough food and preserve pasture for animals to feed on. A common crop-livestock
farming is the growing of lettuce and keeping of ducks on the same piece of land. The waste from
ducks will be used as manure in the filds of lettuce; this manure will boost the harvest lettuce
which in turn will provide food for the ducks.

An advantage of integreated crop-livestock farming 1s that the waste products of one component
serve as a resource for the other. In this situation, a farmer is able to have both crops and livestock
on the same piece of land. Above all, the faeces of livestock may be used in production of bio-

energy that is maybe used in household lightening.

Glossary:
aggravate- agravar
rangelands- pastagens
waste-desperdicio
boost —aumentar

What is integrated crop-livestock farming?

Give the example of a common crop-livestock farming acording to the text.
Why should manure be used in the field of lettuce?

Mention one (1) advantage of integrated crop-livestock farming.

Can crop-livestock farming reduce poverty in our country?

Does the high demand of food makes it hard for animals to have grazing lands?
Can integrated crop-livestock farming be only practiced in Mozambique?

Section II: Choose the best alternative (A,B,C or D) in each of the following sentences. Write
the letter only. ( There are 9,0 marks for this section).

Please turn the page over

