uso Serual was Escolar
Nao da para aceitar Rem uma escola livre do SIDA

Republica de Mogambique
Ministério da Educacao
Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias

ESG / 2013 Exame de Inglés 2" Epoca
10° Classe 90 Minutos

Esta prova contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Responda-as na sua folha de respostas.
Em cada seccao esta indicada, entre parénteses, a cotacao.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Gorongosa National Park is at the southern end of the Great African Rift valley in the heart of central
Mozambique. It comprises 1,2 million hectares of open plan, bush, swamp and waterways, spread between
the Pungwe and Urema rivers. During the 1960s this was one of the finest game reserves in Southern Africa
and attracted more than 12000 visitors a year and had more game than the Kruger National Park.

The famous camp at casa dos ledes, or the “house of lions” was so named because a pride of lions inhabited
the old buildings and could frequently be seen clambering over the framework and broken walls. Sadly they
like the vast herds of buffalo, eland, kudu wildebeest and sable, are now gone. During the war much of the
game was shot for food, and the rest camp at Chitengo was used as a base and subsequently bombed to bits.
Recently the Mozambican government has started restoring the park, erecting a small campsite at Chitengo
and clearing mines from the roads. The park can now be explored in private vehicles or organized game
drives. The vegetation and birdlife is still superb and there are plans to introduce game in the near future
from South Africa and Zimbabwe, but it will take decades before restoration is completed.

Adapted
Glossary
comprise — compreender swamp — pantano bits — pedagos
campsite — parque de campismo superb — excelente erecting — erguer, construir

1. How wide is Gorongosa National Park?

2. How many visitors does it attract in a year?

3. The famous camp at casa dos ledes was named House of Lions. Why?
4. What are the government actions on the Gorongosa Park?

5. In one or two sentences, write the overall idea of the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. Samuel ------ go to Angonia next week.
A would B_ could Cc will D is
7. Which sentence is in the present simple?
A He read news paper every day C_ He did his homework
B_ She went to Maputo last night D_ Maria goes to school every day
8. I ------ to a similar seminar in Europe last year.
A go B_ went C_ have gone D has gone

Please turn the paper over



2013/10" Classe/Exame de Inglés/2“ Epoca

9. People ------ a lot of food at the celebration last Sunday.

A is eating B_ will eat C eating D ate
10. Which one is ------ expensive knife?

A the more B the most C_ most D more
11. When he ------ school, he will go to University to study medicine.

A finishes B finished C_ would finish D_ will finish
12. We ------ a new house last week.

A buys B_ buying C_ bought D_ will buy
13. We have been studying English ------ three years.

A for Bs since C from D_ until
14. These shoes ------ in our country.

A made Bare made C make D_ is made
15. Mozambican people ------ live in safe places to avoid suffering from floods.

A shouldn’t Bs should C are D is

Section III: In the following text some words have been left out. From the words given below the text,
select the one that best completes each space. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

The modern Olympic Games began in 1896. The first records of ---- 16 ---- date from 776 BC and it is likely
that many ---- 17 ---- were held before then. America has hosted the modern Olympics four ---- 18 ---- and
Australia twice. No Olympics were held in 1916, 1940 or 1944 because of ---- 19 ----. The winter ---- 20 ----
began in 1924, originally in the same year as the ---- 21 ---- competition but are now held on different ---- 22
----: the following were in 2006 in Turin. The Olympic Games have changed over time and are regulated by
the International Olympic ---- 23 ----. Almost every 24 from archery to yachting has featured in the
games and it continues to be the world's largest sports ---- 25 ----.

16. A goals B_ games C post D ball

17. A competitions B_ fights C_ nations D personals
18. A hours B_ times C_ minutes D seconds
19. A hostel B_ content C polygamy D_ war

20. A Word B Olympics C Orphans D Flow

21. A soul B_ key C summer D_ window
22. <A houses B_ restaurants C_ parks Ds years

23. A Committee B_ Teams C_ Streams D Class

24. A stadium B sport C_ club D team

25. A seminar Bs summit C_ event D_ meeting

Section IV: Writing (There are 5 marks for this section)
26. In about 150 words, write a composition about your future plans.

Do not sign your composition
THE END


