uso Serual was Escolar
Nao da para aceitar Rem uma escola livre do SIDA

Republica de Mogambique
Ministério da Educacao
Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias

ESG / 2013 Exame de Inglés 2" Epoca
10° Classe 90 Minutos

Esta prova contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Responda-as na sua folha de respostas.
Em cada seccao esta indicada, entre parénteses, a cotacao.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Gorongosa National Park is at the southern end of the Great African Rift valley in the heart of central
Mozambique. It comprises 1,2 million hectares of open plan, bush, swamp and waterways, spread between
the Pungwe and Urema rivers. During the 1960s this was one of the finest game reserves in Southern Africa
and attracted more than 12000 visitors a year and had more game than the Kruger National Park.

The famous camp at casa dos ledes, or the “house of lions” was so named because a pride of lions inhabited
the old buildings and could frequently be seen clambering over the framework and broken walls. Sadly they
like the vast herds of buffalo, eland, kudu wildebeest and sable, are now gone. During the war much of the
game was shot for food, and the rest camp at Chitengo was used as a base and subsequently bombed to bits.
Recently the Mozambican government has started restoring the park, erecting a small campsite at Chitengo
and clearing mines from the roads. The park can now be explored in private vehicles or organized game
drives. The vegetation and birdlife is still superb and there are plans to introduce game in the near future
from South Africa and Zimbabwe, but it will take decades before restoration is completed.

Adapted
Glossary
comprise — compreender swamp — pantano bits — pedagos
campsite — parque de campismo superb — excelente erecting — erguer, construir

1. How wide is Gorongosa National Park?

2. How many visitors does it attract in a year?

3. The famous camp at casa dos ledes was named House of Lions. Why?
4. What are the government actions on the Gorongosa Park?

5. In one or two sentences, write the overall idea of the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. Samuel ------ go to Angonia next week.
A would B_ could Cc will D is
7. Which sentence is in the present simple?
A He read news paper every day C_ He did his homework
B_ She went to Maputo last night D_ Maria goes to school every day
8. I ------ to a similar seminar in Europe last year.
A go B_ went C_ have gone D has gone

Please turn the paper over

