Rowen cscs mes

Republica de Mocambique

I
es Ministério da Educacio e Cultura 1" Epoca
‘asse / 2008 Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagaio e Equivaléncias 90 Minutos

Section I;
a I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
8iven in the text, (There are 5 marks for this section) :

; i ”
erat! studies Show that about forty-five percent of Mozambique’s total land area is suitable for agriculture.
Crops lik 18 an important source of income for 75 percent of the 20 million inhabitants of the country4
eaten mn cashew nuts and Coconuts are grown by small farmers in areas like Inhambane and Gaza. They
food sex Ee ahmed with an important source for foreign exchange each year and provide the growers with
aoa aeial anal harvest oF coconuts is usually around 240,000 tonnes and the annual harvest of cashews is
pares . 7 tonnes. Other major cash crops grown by small farmers include tobacco and cotton. The
La lon of tobacco has expanded$in 1977, only 3.500 tonnes were produced, but by 2004, 50.000 tonnes
MA are Produced} Cotton harvests fluctuated from 74.000 tonnes in 1997 and 35.000 tonnes in 1900 to
to .! tonnes in 2004. These cash crops, along with oilseeds, tea, citrus and horticultural crops, particularly
matoes, offer altemative sources of revenue to the small farmers, in the interior districts, where coconuts and
cashews are not grown.
Ona different scale, 30.000 hectares of industrial plantations of sugar cane are grown at four operational sites
surrounding sugar mills in Maputo and Sofala provinces. Sugar cane production has risen from 386.000
tonnes in 1998 to 2.22 million tones in 2004 due to improved organisation and production practices.
- Other crops include maize, cassava, sorghum, beans, groundnuts, millet and rice.
Livestock numbers are low, as herds have not yet recovered from the losses during the civil war and the
floods of 2000. ..m (Leaming English grade 9 Longman Mocambique)

Glossary

suitable — apropriada/o grown — cultivado/a cotton — algodio
source — fonte livestock — gado harvest — colheita
income — rendimento exchange — troca crop — safra

cashew nuts — castanha de caji tonnes — toneladas

1. What is the percentage of the suitable land for agriculture?

2, What can crops like cashew nuts and coconuts provide to the country?
3. What has happened to the production of tobacco in the recent years?
4. Mention seven of other food crops that are grown in Mozambique.

5. In one or two sentences, write the main idea of the text.

Section I: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the fo Mowing
sentences, Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. You are coming for dinner, ---------?

A. aren’t you B. are you C. is you D. isn’t you
7. Ihave given her all the money ----------- I have.

A. what B. whom C. that D. who

8. I forgot some soap for the washing.

A. buying B. to buy C. bought D. buys

Please turn the paprer over


2008/10" Clas ede I “Epoca

9, Could I —-—-—-—- earlier tomorrow?

A. to leave B. left C. leaving D. leave
10. You can do that —-———-.

A. yourself B. myself C. himself D. herself
11, Pelé, —s—-- everybody knows, is a great soccer player.

A. whom B. who C. which D. whose
12. A car takes - passengers than a bus.

A. much B. less C. fewer D. little
13. Greece ~----—— last year’s world soccer championship.

A. win B. wins C. to win D. won
14, He said he was going to pass —-—----- examinations.

A. her B. his C. their D. our

15. ——--- a few community self-help groups here in Mozambique.

A. There are B. There is C. There was D. There isn’t

Section II: In the following text some words have been left out. From the words given below the text,
select the one that best completes each space. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

The. combination of Pestana Hotels and Resorts in Africa offers guests the perfect settings to create
memorable moments — whether its business or leisure. Set in the tranquil —-16——of the African bush,
Pestana Kruger Lodge offers. *+—-17—~-of the art conferencing rooms, superb accommodation and great
sporting —-18-———-for everyone, as well as the opportunity to rediscover the —-19--—of the bush. If, however,
you are looking for « vibrant —-20-——vibe, combined with the exotic lure of —-21—~, may we suggest the
Pestana Rovuma Hotel in the heart of Maputo. Business or pleasure? Pestana Rovuma will suit your —-22—-—-.
Yearning for the delights of a tropical paradise, with turquoise ~-23—-, beautiful beaches, fun filled —-24-—-
-sport days and romantic, tranquil ---25----? Then look no further than Pestana Inhaca or Pestana Bazaruto
Lodges, exotic island resorts in the Indian Ocean, equipped with everything you need to make your holiday on
your business excursion — filled with many memorable moments.

16. A. terrace B. sun C. leg D. heart

17. A. lodge B. state C. restaurant D. bar

18. A. facilities B, house C. cottage D. cave

19. A. garbage B. pollution C. bush D. magic
20. A. hospital B. city C. nurse D. health
21. A. Europe B. Asia C. Africa: D. America
22. A.car B. bus C. shopping D. needs
23. A. sea B. mirror C. bathroom D. tap

24. A. invitation B. feast, C. drink D. water
25. A. nightclub B. sunsets C. hostel D. school

Section IV: Writing (There are 5 marks for this section)
Write a composition of about 150 words describing what your plans are after you finish grade 10.

Do not sign you composition
THE END


