Permeccsnensn

2 Epoca

Inglés Republica de Mocambique
90. Minutos

10° Classe / 2006 Ministério da Educagio e Cultura

Section I: Read the following text and then answer the questions below according to the
information given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section.)

Conventional medicine and alternative medicine are very different. Conventional medicine includes
pills, injections and surgery, and it concentrates on curing diseases and symptom: Alternative medicine
includes herbal remedies, prayer and spiritual healing. It concentrates on making the whole person
better, rather than just getting rid of a disease.

The San people of the Kalahari practise a kind of alternative medicine through their healing dances.
These dances last throughout the night, from dusk until dawn. The women sit in a circle around a fire,
clapping and singing, while the men dance in a circle around them. During the dance, the gods give the
people the ability to heal others.

Traditional African medicine is an alternative medicine based on the belief that the ancestors
communicate with living people, mostly through dreams. Healers can interpret dreams to find out what
message the ancestors are sending. When the ancestors do not protect someone,’ ‘then he can become ill.
And if someone does something wrong, the ancestors can make him ill so that he knows that he has
made a mistake.

Sangomas are traditional doctors who can diagnose what is wrong with someone. They often do this by
throwing bones and interpreting what the bones mean depending on how they lie. An inyanga heals
people through herbalism, making medicines out of herbs, flowers, roots and bark.

Glossary

surgery - cirurgia dusk - ao anoitecer

healing - cura dawn - de madrugada

herbs - ervas.

1. In what kind of medicine does surgery take place?

2. From where do the San people get the power to heal?

3. According to the text, how do our ancestors communicate with us?
4. When do the ancestors make people ill?

5. Inone or two sentences explain briefly the overall idea of the text.

Section I: Choose the word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fiils the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section.)

--- mammals in the world.

6. Elephants are

A. larger than B. the largest C. largely D. fewer
7. Ralph doesn’t look happy today, - 2
A. has he B. does he C. will he D.doesn’t he
8. If I ---- ~ you were sick, Id have visited you.
A. had had B. had C. had known D. have had
9. Coca-cola ------------ by Dr. John Pemberton.
B. has invented C. was invented D. invents

A. inventing
10. There was a loud noise yesterday evening. I ----------- what that was.
A. wonder B. wondering C. was wondered D.wonderful

11. Tete is --- province 0} mbique. . (
awl, hot otter’ C. hotter than D the hottest S

