Sera oscota re oo sas

Inglés Repibli A a

publica de Mogambique 1* Epoca
10* Classe / 2007 Ministério da Educac&o e Cultura 90 Minutos
Section I: Read the following text and then answer the questions that follow according to the

information given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section.)

Polio is an illness, which can attack people of any age, but it is especially dangerous with young children.
The disease begins with a high temperature, vomiting, diarrhoea and ey muscles Polio jah kill the
muscles in a person’s legs, and anyone who gets this disease can become crippled for life. One or both
legs may become thin. Polio can also kill the muscles in a child’s throat. When this happens, the child
cannot breathe and as a result it dies.

(Polio can be prevented by three doses of a vaccine called Sabin. UN baby must get the first polio vaccine
when it is three months old. At four and a half months, a baby must get the second vaccine, and when it
reaches six months, it must get the last dose. Children must be vaccinated against polio in the first six
months of their lives. When a baby has been vaccinated against polio three times, it is immune; it is safe
and cannot catch the disease.

For the polio vaccine to be effective, it must be kept in a fridge. If it is allowed to get warm, the people
who are vaccinated with it will not be safe from the disease.

¥ Young babies must be immunised against other dangerous diseases such as tetanus, diphtheria,
tuberculosis and whooping cough. However, vaccinations do not cure all diseases. They only prevent
people from getting those diseases against which they are immunised.

(in English for Mozambique by Tomé Mpiuka & Lucas Mkuti)
Glossary
illness/disease - doenga safe - segura/protegida against - contra
dangerous - perigosa tetanus - tétano whoomping cough - tosse convulsa
reaches - atinge diphtheria - difteria

What are the symptoms of polio?

How can people prevent polio?

How many times must a baby be vaccinated against polio?

Why must babies be vaccinated against diseases?

In one or two sentences write the summary of the most important ideas of the text.

Yao

Section II: Choose the best word or group of words to go in the blank in each sentence. Write the
letter (A, B, C or D) only. (There are 5 marks for this section.)

6. Scientists have put together a true picture of the ------- effects of tobacco on the human body.

A. terrible B. good C. innocent D. harm
7, Life on earth depends not only -------- the climate, but also on the atmosphere.

A. in B. at C.on D. above
8. Ihave always ---------- a problem with my sight glasses.

A. having B. had C. has D. have
9. - -- can not they sit at the clean table?

A. Which B. What C. Why D. Whose
10. One night Susan and ----------- went to the cinema but we were very late.

A. mine B. yours C. me D.I
11. What do you think you ------------- do when you leave school?

A. are B. to C. might D. ought

Please turn the paper over


2007/10" Classe/Exame de Inglés/1 * Epoca

12. The police caught a thief. --- théiother one ran-away.

B. also’ '" C. 80... $0 - D. for
‘A. many an itis difficult to eet his ress points. ; D. to much
14. It --------< that bread is aos frigid expensive "eta i aerene
grow your rE vegetables to avoids oer others. aiaeiguta

Section III: In the following passage some words have been left out: From the words ae yet
the passage, select the one that best completes each space. Write the letter ¢ Se
D) only. (There are 5 marks for this section.)

Men have always wanted salt to give taste to their food. In hot’ ---16---- like Mozambique, men hav G
found a way of extracting ----17---- from the sea water along the coasts. They have been doing ‘this for
many ----18----. Fortunately, there is so much salt dissolved in ----19---- water that we will be’able to go
on taking salt from the sea in the same ----20---- for years to come.

The sea is always moving. Twice a ----21---- the water slowly rises and moves in closer to the ----22+---.
Then, a few hours later, it falls back and moves out. The tides of the sea rise and fall to different ----23----
twice a day. So every day there are two high ----24----, when the water is high up close to the land, and
two low tides, when the ----25---- has gone down and away from the land.

16. A. countries B. forest C. landscape D. mountain
17. A. dressing B. food C. beaches D. salt

18. A. season B. years C. month D. year

19. A. abroad B. overseas C. sea D. boat

20. A. way B .opportunity C. chance D. occasion
21. A. christmas B. century C. decade D. day

22. A. places B. land C. island. D. home

23. A. category B. class C. levels D. grade

24. A. tides B. wave C. fish D. ship

25. A. salt B. pot C. raw D. water

Section IV: Writing (There are 5 marks for this section.)

Population census is very important for every country planning. In August 2007 the. third population
census was held throughout the country. In about 120 to 150.write what would be the advantages of this
population census for Mozambique.

Do not sign your composition.

THE END


