Aburce Sexual uar Escolar
Nao dd pata aceitar SR rerum escotetnre to sin

Republica de Mogambique
Ministério da Educacao
Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagaéo e Equivaléncias

ESG / 2014 Exame de Inglés 2" Epoca
10° Classe 90 Minutos

Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-as com atencao e responda na sua folha de exame.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

In recent times, there has been much debate about the victims of domestic violence. Domestic violence is any
form of abuse that occurs within the household. It includes marital conflicts leading to physical confrontation
by both or one of the partners, aggression by parents on children, and vice versa. Domestic violence, as
described by an expert from the Liga Mocgambicana dos Direitos Humanos (LMDH) in Maputo, can also
consist of moral violence. Moral violence means intimidation and insults that lead to tense situations,
sometimes with serious outcomes.
According to the records of some years ago, 85% of domestic violence cases were dealt with by LMDH. The
other 15 % were cases of child abuse, child labour and violence or discrimination against the handicapped.
The handicapped suffered discrimination in public places and when going for employment interviews.
Of the total cases of domestic violence reported, 99% were reported in cities and small towns, with 14% of
the cases coming from Tete, Beira and Quelimane and 27% from the northern cities. Our capital city,
Maputo, is responsible for most of the cases, with more than half of the overall total. It is curious and
surprising to note that a few cases, 0.5 % of the total, were domestic violence cases in which men were the
victims.

Adapted from “In Kuhungwe News, Inc.”

Glossary

Occurs - ocorre, acontece, surge Labour - trabalho Interviews - entrevistas
Partners - parceiros, cénjuges Employment - emprego, trabalho — Outcomes - resultados
Insults - insultos, ofensas Handicapped - incapacitado

1. What is domestic violence?

2. Mention three (3) forms of domestic violence described in the text.
3. What does Moral violence mean?

4. What organization defends Human Rights in Mozambique?

5. Give a suitable title to the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. I really liked the concert. It was so...

A awful. B boring. C exciting. D_ worse.
7. She ------ comes to school by bus because she lives far from the school.
A always Bs easily C_ never D yesterday

Please turn the paper over


2014/10" Classe/Exame de Inglés/2“ Epoca

8. He wants to become ------ artist because he is good at drawing.

Aa B an C or D the
9. She didn’t do her homework ------ she forgot to write it down.

A and B_ although C_ because D_ but
10. Belarmino speaks Portuguese very well ------ he doesn’t speak English.

A also B_ because C but D or
11. I didn’t find him because he wasn’t ------ home.

A at B_ between C on Dover
12. If you are having problems with your parents, ------ to talk with them.

A tells B tried C ty D trying
13. The doctor prescribed aspirin and ------ me to rest.

A are told Bis told C tell D told
14. My parents ------ me to stay at home and study for my exams.

A find B_ ordered C_ ordering D originated

15. She knows a lot of people, ------ 2
A can she B_ doesn’t she C_isshe D isn’t she

Section III: In the following text some words have been left out. From the words given below the text,
select the one that best completes each space. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Women’s Liberation grew in the 1960s and, as ---16--- struggled for equality with ---17---, the words
“feminism” and “sexism” became part of the ---18---. Women finally began to be accepted into traditionally
male ---19---. They can vote and find ---20--- but they still have little social, political or economic ---21---.
Some ---22--- argue that men and women are going to become more and more equal. More and more ---23---
have begun to appear in the media of men taking care of the children and doing the ---24---. They say this
reflects what is happening in ---25--- and they feel that this trend will continue.

16. A animals Bs children C_ people D_ women
17. A_ kids B_ men C_ soldiers D tourists
18. A language B nationality C_ source D_ tongue
19. A areas B guards C_ parks D rivers
20. A barriers B borders C maize D_ work

21. <A division B_ member C_ power D producer
22. <A beasts B fables C farmers D people
23. A dreams B equipments C_ images D paths
24. A home B_ homeland C_ housework D_ walk

25. A air B_ jungle C_ ocean D society

Section IV: Writing. (There are 5 marks for this section)
26. In about 150 words, write a description of your own culture — life style, food, dances, etc.

Do not sign your composition
THE END


