“hase Sewal was Exceed
Nao dé para acettar R ry pasoscu ira 00 SUM

Republica de Mo i
er sambique
Ministério da Educagao e Desenvolvimento Humano

Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagdo e Equivalér
1" Epoca

90 Minutos

7 fl the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

ESG / 2017 ‘
10° Classe Exame de Lingua Inglesa

E: de
[ Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-as com atengao € responda pa Sua ae

Malnutrition and diseases

Se is a health condition in which the patient doesn’t have enough of the four groups of nutrients —
Proteins, carbohydrates, lipids (fat) and vitamins{ A person with malnutrition can develop some related
being the lack of these nutrients

diseases. These diseases occur for different reasons, the most important one
in quality and quantity. The shortage of these nutrients in our body \causes diseases related to malnutrition
such as anaemia, kwashiorkor, blindness, etc.
There are many symptoms of malnutrition, but the most common that a person with malnutrition shows are:
pale skin, weakness and swelling of the body, If you have a member of your family with these symptoms,
you should persuade him/her to seek medical assistance as soon as possible.
Malnutrition and its related diseases can be cured but it depends on the stage of the disease. Malnutrition can
be treated if patients change their eating habits — for example, eating a lot of fresh fruit and having a balanced
diet. In hospitals, doctors prescribe antibiotics and vitamins, which help treat the disease. But the best way of
recovering from malnutrition is to eat natural food, lots of vegetables and fruits!

Adapted from Inglés 9° Classe

Glossary
Blindness —cegueira Pale - palido Prescribe —receitar Swelling — inchago

1. What is malnutrition?

2. Name two (2) diseases which are related to malnutrition.
3. What are the symptoms of malnutrition?

4. What is the best way to cure malnutrition?

5. Write the general idea of the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words that best fill the gap in each of the following sentences.
Write the letter (A, B, C or D) only. (There are 10 marks for this section) °

6. Where is the exercise book? I ------ find it.
A can’t B could C mightn’t D~ would
7. The future is ------ for young people today than it was fifty years ago.
A. bigger B_ bright C_ brighter D_ brightest
8. You ------ always learn new English vocabulary.
A must B_ mustn’t C need D shouldn't
9. “You ------ training hard”, he said. “J think you are going to make part of the first team.”
A are B is C was D will

Please turn the paper over


2017/10" Classe/ Exame de Liygua Inglesa/l" Ey oq

F it now.
10. Have you finished ------ my pencil? I need it Fleer >
A to using B use hart. “sing
11. Ana loves to express ~~~ feelings throve"" C. D o
A her B his rid? i
12. Who is —---- football player in the W° C_ the best D the most
A. better B_ good
13. This is an elections’ year, ama . C_ haven’t it D isn’tit
A. can’tit B_ doesn’tit
14, —— school has been painted by our PATEDES.
A Our B Ours - DN
15. Students must ---... the school rules. Fe
A deny B disagree : > obey D_ oblige
16. Please, can I borrow your ~~ to cut his paper: ;
A. fork B_ hoe C_ scissors D spoons
17. My aunt lives in a small —-~ in Swaziland.
A continent -) country C town D word
18. Fishermen use ------ when fishing.
A nets B_ nibbles C scissors D syringes
19. There is a painting hanged on the ------ .
A’ carpet B floor C sky D wall
20. ------ is a sexually transmitted disease.
A Cholera B_ HIV/AIDS C Malaria D_ Tuberculosis
21. Did you go to the cinema? I heard that the ------ was very interesting,
A chairs B lessons C menu D_ movie
22. My little brother plays the ------ so well.
A food B noise C_ piano D television
23. Violence against woman is a ------ in the Constitution of the Republic.
A crime B disease C_ joke D sport
24. The ------ was made by my mother. .
A apple B_ banana C cake D_ orange
25. All these are sports EXCEPT...
A cheese. B karate. C rugby. D_ skating.

Section III: Writing. (There are 5 marks for this section)

26. In about 150 words, write a composition about the importance of water for your community.
Do not sign your composition.

THE END


