“hase Sewal was Exceed
Nao dé para acettar R ry pasoscu ira 00 SUM

Republica de Mo i
er sambique
Ministério da Educagao e Desenvolvimento Humano

Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagdo e Equivalér
1" Epoca

90 Minutos

7 fl the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

ESG / 2017 ‘
10° Classe Exame de Lingua Inglesa

E: de
[ Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-as com atengao € responda pa Sua ae

Malnutrition and diseases

Se is a health condition in which the patient doesn’t have enough of the four groups of nutrients —
Proteins, carbohydrates, lipids (fat) and vitamins{ A person with malnutrition can develop some related
being the lack of these nutrients

diseases. These diseases occur for different reasons, the most important one
in quality and quantity. The shortage of these nutrients in our body \causes diseases related to malnutrition
such as anaemia, kwashiorkor, blindness, etc.
There are many symptoms of malnutrition, but the most common that a person with malnutrition shows are:
pale skin, weakness and swelling of the body, If you have a member of your family with these symptoms,
you should persuade him/her to seek medical assistance as soon as possible.
Malnutrition and its related diseases can be cured but it depends on the stage of the disease. Malnutrition can
be treated if patients change their eating habits — for example, eating a lot of fresh fruit and having a balanced
diet. In hospitals, doctors prescribe antibiotics and vitamins, which help treat the disease. But the best way of
recovering from malnutrition is to eat natural food, lots of vegetables and fruits!

Adapted from Inglés 9° Classe

Glossary
Blindness —cegueira Pale - palido Prescribe —receitar Swelling — inchago

1. What is malnutrition?

2. Name two (2) diseases which are related to malnutrition.
3. What are the symptoms of malnutrition?

4. What is the best way to cure malnutrition?

5. Write the general idea of the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words that best fill the gap in each of the following sentences.
Write the letter (A, B, C or D) only. (There are 10 marks for this section) °

6. Where is the exercise book? I ------ find it.
A can’t B could C mightn’t D~ would
7. The future is ------ for young people today than it was fifty years ago.
A. bigger B_ bright C_ brighter D_ brightest
8. You ------ always learn new English vocabulary.
A must B_ mustn’t C need D shouldn't
9. “You ------ training hard”, he said. “J think you are going to make part of the first team.”
A are B is C was D will

Please turn the paper over
