Muse Sexual nas Ercolas
Nao da pata aceitar Reorana escola livre Ho SIDA

Reptiblica de Mocambique
Inglés Ministério da Educacao 2? Epoca
10° Classe / 2011 Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias 90 Minutos

Esta prova contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-a com atencao e responda na sua folha de exame.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

The Living Dragon
Dragons are mythical creatures with slender heads, a body like a dinosaur and a long tail like a lizard. What
makes a dragon unique is its ability to spew fire from its mouth or nostrils. Dragons have been the centre of
attention for centuries and contemporary graphic artists enjoy drawing dragons.
Do you know that there is a real dragon living on earth today just like it has been for millions of years? While
it doesn’t breathe fire or rear up ten feet tail, this ancient lizard lives much like it has since prehistoric times.
The Komodo dragon was discovered only about a century ago on the remote Indonesian Islands of Komodo,
Gala Mooting, Rica, and Flores near the equator between the Pacific Ocean and the India Ocean. The
Komodo dragon is an endangered species; there are only 3,000 to 5,000 left. They are known to live about
thirty years.
The adult Komodo dragon is a very big creature, growing to a length of 3,3 metres and a weight of more than
136,2 kilograms. They are the heaviest of all lizard species. They are carnivores that feed on other animals
like wild pigs, deer, and even water buffalo which also inhabit the islands. A Komodo dragon can eat as
much as eighty percent of its body weight in a single feeding! The Komodo dragon is a reptile and, like its
cousins the alligator and crocodile, the dragon has powerful legs and jaws as well as sharp claws and teeth
well-suited for larger prey. The Komodo dragon can run up to 28,8 kilometres per hour over a short distance.
The Komodo dragon doesn’t need to run after swift prey like wild pigs and deer. While alligators and
crocodiles lie in wait for prey in the water, the Komodo dragon camouflages itself on land and uses the
powerful legs to lunge at passing animals. If the prey is not caught in the sharp teeth and powerful jaws, it
will quickly die from the dragon’s bite. Komodo dragon saliva contains over fifty kinds of bacteria that,
while harmless to the dragon, will kill another animal within twenty-four hours. The dragon uses its keen
sense of smell and simply follows the trail to its next meal.

Glossary

dragons - dragdes _‘ to spew — lancar pela boca prey - presa

tail - cauda an endangered species — espécie em risco de extingao trail - rasto

lizard - lagarto to lunge — movimento para atacar harmless - inofensivo
1. What kind of animals are dragons?

2. Why do artists enjoy drawing dragons?

3. Why does the author say that the Komodo dragon is an endangered species?

4. What is the Komodo dragon’s meal?

5. In one or two sentences, write the overall idea of the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. My cousin is the ------------ boy in our family.
A. cleverest B. clever than C. as clever as D. less clever than
Please turn the paper over


2011/10* Classe/Exame de Inglés/2* Epoca

7. She always writes English compositions ------------

A. confidently B. strongly C. interesting D. bad
8. On Sunday I saw ----------- interesting film about Tsunamis.

A. the B. some C. an D.a
9. Paula is ---------- player than Jane.

A. the better B. a worse C. the worse D. good
10. Last night the television was on, but I ----------- it.

A. were watching B. will be watching C. wasn’t watching D. am watching
11. -------------- it rained a lot; the agriculture sector has not performed well.

A. Becau B. Despite C. But D. Although
12. There’s someone ------------ the bus stop.

A. for B. between C. at D. over
13. A lot of ice cream ----------- every summer.

A. is eaten B. were eaten C. are eaten D. was eaten
14. Unless she helps me, I ------------- her to the party.

A. might invite B. won't invite C. don’t invite D. should invite
15. Men, women and children must ------------ for their rights.

A. play B. forget C. allow D. fight

Section III: In the following text some words have been left out. From the words given below the text,
select the one that best completes each space. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

There are many --- 16 --- ways for classifying sports, and maybe none of them is completely satisfactory.
One --- 17 --- is to classify them according to the --- 18 --- of the sport. If we follow this --- 19 --- of thought,
we could divide sport in three main categories: different kinds of racing, opponent-based sport; and
achievement sport. Lets look at them one by one. In racing --- 20 ---, you aim to be faster than a set of other -
-- 21 ---, in a variety of ways. We could subdivide this section into three: human, human- assisted and races
involving an --- 22 --- power source. The first of these is --- 23 --- racing.

This category is made up of sports where your --- 24 --- is provided only by your own --- 25 --- and energy,
such as running and swimming.

16. A different B various C svirus D _ types

17. A forms B type C_ way D = decision
18. A time B field C objective D _piayer
19. A team B_ house C road D _iine

20. A sport Bscar C bike D _ street

21. A animal B opponent C personal D people
22. A foreign B - sport C external D_ home

23. A human B animal C bird D_ humanity
24. A away B speed C drink D_ food

25. A fingers B_eyes C hair D_ muscles

Section 4: Writing (There are 5 marks for this section).

26. In about 150 words, write a composition on how can the media help in the reduction of HIV and
AIDS in Mozambique.
Do not sign your composition.

THE END


