Muse Sexual nas Ercolas
Nao da pata aceitar Reorana escola livre Ho SIDA

Reptiblica de Mocambique
Inglés Ministério da Educacao 2? Epoca
10° Classe / 2011 Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias 90 Minutos

Esta prova contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-a com atencao e responda na sua folha de exame.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

The Living Dragon
Dragons are mythical creatures with slender heads, a body like a dinosaur and a long tail like a lizard. What
makes a dragon unique is its ability to spew fire from its mouth or nostrils. Dragons have been the centre of
attention for centuries and contemporary graphic artists enjoy drawing dragons.
Do you know that there is a real dragon living on earth today just like it has been for millions of years? While
it doesn’t breathe fire or rear up ten feet tail, this ancient lizard lives much like it has since prehistoric times.
The Komodo dragon was discovered only about a century ago on the remote Indonesian Islands of Komodo,
Gala Mooting, Rica, and Flores near the equator between the Pacific Ocean and the India Ocean. The
Komodo dragon is an endangered species; there are only 3,000 to 5,000 left. They are known to live about
thirty years.
The adult Komodo dragon is a very big creature, growing to a length of 3,3 metres and a weight of more than
136,2 kilograms. They are the heaviest of all lizard species. They are carnivores that feed on other animals
like wild pigs, deer, and even water buffalo which also inhabit the islands. A Komodo dragon can eat as
much as eighty percent of its body weight in a single feeding! The Komodo dragon is a reptile and, like its
cousins the alligator and crocodile, the dragon has powerful legs and jaws as well as sharp claws and teeth
well-suited for larger prey. The Komodo dragon can run up to 28,8 kilometres per hour over a short distance.
The Komodo dragon doesn’t need to run after swift prey like wild pigs and deer. While alligators and
crocodiles lie in wait for prey in the water, the Komodo dragon camouflages itself on land and uses the
powerful legs to lunge at passing animals. If the prey is not caught in the sharp teeth and powerful jaws, it
will quickly die from the dragon’s bite. Komodo dragon saliva contains over fifty kinds of bacteria that,
while harmless to the dragon, will kill another animal within twenty-four hours. The dragon uses its keen
sense of smell and simply follows the trail to its next meal.

Glossary

dragons - dragdes _‘ to spew — lancar pela boca prey - presa

tail - cauda an endangered species — espécie em risco de extingao trail - rasto

lizard - lagarto to lunge — movimento para atacar harmless - inofensivo
1. What kind of animals are dragons?

2. Why do artists enjoy drawing dragons?

3. Why does the author say that the Komodo dragon is an endangered species?

4. What is the Komodo dragon’s meal?

5. In one or two sentences, write the overall idea of the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. My cousin is the ------------ boy in our family.
A. cleverest B. clever than C. as clever as D. less clever than
Please turn the paper over
