Puntos pela Das

SR reruns score wo sn

Republica de Mogambique
Ministério da Educagio e Desenvolvimento Humano
Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias

ESG / 2015 Exame de Lingua Inglesa 2" Epoca
10° Classe . 90 Minutos

Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-as com atengio e responda na sua folha de exame.

Section i 7: I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
Siven in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

An oil factory in Angoche district pollutes Inguri community. Oil is made from coconuts. According to the
local residents, the lives of People have changed a lot since the opening of this oil factory.
The first person interviewed was Maimuna Mucussete, 42, born and raised in Inguri, who said: “when they
transform coconuts into oil, the workers make so much noise that we can’t sleep at night.”
Another interviewee was Manuel Selemane: “What I don’t like is the smell that comes out of the factory. At
7:30 a.m. the smell makes me vomit” and he continued “When it rains, the water carries litter from the
factory into our wells, which provokes many diseases after the rain”, concluded Selemane.
Nina, a student from the local school says: “My brother told me that he thinks that people here cough because
of the smoke from the factory.”
“Pollution should be one of our biggest concern”, says Dr. Nunes Alberto, senior lecturer at the Pedagogic
University, a specialist in environmental studies. He talked about pollution and its consequences.
According to Dr. Alberto, pollution is the process of making air and water dangerously dirty and not suitable
for people to use. For example, air can be polluted by smoke, chemicals, etc., and water can be polluted by
poisoning.

Adapted from Inglés 9* Classe

Glossary

Raise — educar, fazer crescer Concern — preocupagiio
Interviewee — entrevistado Suitable — apropriado

Wells — pocos de agua Poisoning — envenenamento

1. What is the negative impact of the oil factory in Angoche?

2. Mention two (2) problems caused by the oil factory in Inguri community,
3. What is pollution?

4. Mention one (1) example of pollution.

5. What is the general idea of the text?

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. The book ------ is on the desk belongs to the teacher.

A which B_ with Cc who D_ whom
.------ are you doing here?
7 A arid B When C Who D_ Whose
Please turn the paper over

Lino


is your book? tis 2015/10" ClasselExame de Lingua Inglesal 2° Epoca
at

on the table.
B_ Where C Which D_ Who
9. rere is ad than Laurinha at cooking.
B good C_ more good asia
10. A lion is ----- thana dog.
A 4 :
angerous Bmore dangerous C most dangerous Cee ene
mr was a boring weekend, --...- anything.
do B Idon'tdo C Idid D Ididn’t do
12. rn joao usually a tennis once or twice a week.
are playing B is playing C play D plays
13. My house is small ----- Tlike it.
A and B_ because C but Do
14. I drink -- of water every day.
A afew B alot C any D_ many
15.1 Want to ------ my English.
A. improve B improved C_ improves D_ improving

Section III: In the following text some words have been left out. From the words given below the text,
select the one that best completes each space. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Nowadays people are more aware that wildlife all over the world is in danger. Many --- 16 --- of animals are
threatened, and could easily become extinct, if we do not make an --- 17 --- to protect them. There are many -
-- 18 --- for this. In some cases, --- 19 --- are hunted for their fur or for other valuable parts of their --- 20 ---.
Some birds, such as parrots, are caught alive and sold as --- 21 ---, For many animals and birds, the --- 22 ---
is that their habitat is disappearing. More land is used for farms, houses or industry, and there are fewer open
--- 23 --- than there once were. Farmers use powerful chemicals to help the crops grow better, but these
chemicals pollute the --- 24 --- and harm wildlife. The most successful animals on -+- 25 --- human beings —
will soon be the only ones left unless, we can solve this problem.

16. A grass B lessons C_ species D_ window
17. A communities B creatures C_ effort D_ people

18. A changes B_ reasons C stages D_ tomatoes
19. A animals B_ house C trees D_ swimmers
20. A bodies B_ doctors C_ glass D planes
21. A_ babies B_ judges C pets D stones
22. A beauty B_ problem C_ solution D_ water

23. A blood B_ broom C_ eraser D spaces
24. A environment B= moon C movement D sun

25. A earth B line C_ machine D_= music

Section IV: Writing. (There are 5 marks for this section)
26. In about 150 words, write a composition about a traditional ceremony that you know.
Do not sign your composition.

THE END


