Puntos pela Das

SR reruns score wo sn

Republica de Mogambique
Ministério da Educagio e Desenvolvimento Humano
Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias

ESG / 2015 Exame de Lingua Inglesa 2" Epoca
10° Classe . 90 Minutos

Este exame contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-as com atengio e responda na sua folha de exame.

Section i 7: I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
Siven in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

An oil factory in Angoche district pollutes Inguri community. Oil is made from coconuts. According to the
local residents, the lives of People have changed a lot since the opening of this oil factory.
The first person interviewed was Maimuna Mucussete, 42, born and raised in Inguri, who said: “when they
transform coconuts into oil, the workers make so much noise that we can’t sleep at night.”
Another interviewee was Manuel Selemane: “What I don’t like is the smell that comes out of the factory. At
7:30 a.m. the smell makes me vomit” and he continued “When it rains, the water carries litter from the
factory into our wells, which provokes many diseases after the rain”, concluded Selemane.
Nina, a student from the local school says: “My brother told me that he thinks that people here cough because
of the smoke from the factory.”
“Pollution should be one of our biggest concern”, says Dr. Nunes Alberto, senior lecturer at the Pedagogic
University, a specialist in environmental studies. He talked about pollution and its consequences.
According to Dr. Alberto, pollution is the process of making air and water dangerously dirty and not suitable
for people to use. For example, air can be polluted by smoke, chemicals, etc., and water can be polluted by
poisoning.

Adapted from Inglés 9* Classe

Glossary

Raise — educar, fazer crescer Concern — preocupagiio
Interviewee — entrevistado Suitable — apropriado

Wells — pocos de agua Poisoning — envenenamento

1. What is the negative impact of the oil factory in Angoche?

2. Mention two (2) problems caused by the oil factory in Inguri community,
3. What is pollution?

4. Mention one (1) example of pollution.

5. What is the general idea of the text?

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. The book ------ is on the desk belongs to the teacher.

A which B_ with Cc who D_ whom
.------ are you doing here?
7 A arid B When C Who D_ Whose
Please turn the paper over

Lino
