Muse Sexual nas Ercolas
Nao da pata aceitar Reorana escola livre Ho SIDA

Reptiblica de Mocambique
Inglés Ministério da Educagao 1° Epoca
10° Classe / 2011 Conselho Nacional de Exames, Certificagao e Equivaléncias 90 Minutos

Esta prova contém vinte e seis (26) perguntas. Leia-a com atencao e responda na sua folha de exame.

Section I: Read the text carefully and then answer the questions below according to the information
given in the text. (There are 5 marks for this section)

Climate change is a reality. Today, our world is hotter than it has been for two thousand years. By the end of
the century, if current trends continue, the global temperature will probably be higher than at any time in the
past two million years. Global warming is one of the most serious challenges we are facing today. We must
reduce emissions of heat- trapping gases if we are to protect the environment, health and economic well-
being of present and future generations.

Global warming is caused by emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases. Certain gases in the
atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide, lead to a “greenhouse effect”, stopping heat from escaping and keeping
the Earth warm enough to sustain life. Although carbon dioxide is not the most powerful of these gases, it is
the most significant, in terms of human effects because of the large quantities that are emitted. Carbon
dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere are now the highest in 150,000 years.

Carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases are emitted primarily by the burning of fossil fuels. For more
than a century, people have relied on burning fossil fuels such as oil, coal and gas for their energy needs.
Factories, power stations and cars are all pumping out pollution into the atmosphere. The clearing of forests
has a similar effect by reducing the number of trees available to use up carbon dioxide in the process of
photosynthesis.

The 1990’s was probably the warmest decade in history, and 1998 the warmest year. There is widespread
agreement that a certain amount of additional warming- about 1,3° Celsius is probably inevitable because of
emissions so far. But it is considered vital that we limit warming to under 2° Celsius if we are to prevent the
worst effects of climate change.

If our greenhouse gas emissions are not brought under control, the speed of climate change over the next
hundred years will be faster than anything known since before the dawn of civilization.

Glossary

current trends - tendéncias em curso _heat-trapping - substancia quente atmosphere - atmosfera
climb - subir, elevar-se enough - suficiente, bastante pumping - bombear, langar
warming - aquecimento although - embora dawn - principio

1. How is global warming caused?

2. Give three (3) examples of how the atmosphere can be polluted.

3. Do you agree that an amount of additional warming on Earth is inevitable? Why?

4. In what way does the climate change affect the world?

5. In one or two sentences, write the overall idea of the text.

Section II: Choose a word or group of words (A, B, C or D) that best fill the gap in each of the
following sentences. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

6. Who is the ------------ basketball player in the world?
A. most B. good C. better D. best
Please turn the paper over


2011/10* Classe/Exame de Inglés/1* Epoca
7. Modern scientists say that medicine should always be tested ------------ .

A. scientifically B. traditionally C. easily D. socially
8. Malangatana worked as ----------- artist at his own art gallery.

A. the B.a C. an D. some
9. Lucky Dube is one of the Africa’s well known and the most ---------- reggae star.

A. success B. better C. best D. successful
10. Listen to the news! It’s saying Mundau will ----------- the elections.

A. take B. win C. won D. lost
11. [bought a newspaper I did not read it.

A. but B. while C. because D. through
12. Don’t sit ------------ the grass, it’s wet.

A. at B. on C. under D. in
13. My keys ----------- at the beach yesterday.

A. were stolen B. was stolen C. stole D. steal
14. The weather is usually good. It - rain very often.

A. don’t B. doesn’t C. did D. do
15. Men, women and children should be ------------ against domestic violence.

A. punished B. arrested C. protected D. judged

Section III: In the following text some words have been left out. From the words given below the text,
select the one that best completes each space. Write the letter only. (There are 5 marks for this section)

It was Mary's birthday. She received a letter from her uncle. "Dear Mary," he wrote in the letter, "Happy ---
16 ---! I'm sending you some chickens. They will arrive --- 17 ---. [hope you like them.” Uncle Toby.

Mary was very pleased. She likes eating --- 18 --- and chicken. "I can keep the chickens for their eggs or eat
them,” she thought.

When the --- 19 --- arrived the next day, they came in a --- 20 ---. Mary was very happy. She took off the box
from the back of the truck and carried it into her --- 21 ---, but the box was so heavy that she dropped it. The
box fell on the --- 22 --- and broke. The chickens all ran out. They ran everywhere. Mary spent --- 23 ---
trying to find them.

A few days later, her uncle came. He asked, "Did the chickens arrive safely?" "Yes, but I dropped the box. It
broke open and the chickens ran everywhere. I spent the whole --- 24 --- looking for them," Mary said.

"Did you find them all?" asked her uncle. "I hope so," Mary answered, "but I only caught eleven of them."
"That's very interesting. I only sent you six." her uncle said with a --- 25 ---.

16. A Birthday B_ New Year C_ Christmas Day D_ Valentine’s Day
17. A last day B that day C yesterday D tomorrow

18. A eggs B_ water C juice D _ stones

19. A airtimes B_ chickens C_ eggs D _ storms

20. A paper B tin Cc box D_ pen

21. A pocket B_ tree C garden D toilet

22. A weather B _ space C ground D house

23. A voices B places C questions D hours

24. A period B_ morning C syear D~ month

25. A box B_ chicken C garden D smile

Section 4: Writing (There are 5 marks for this section)

26. Technology is good for the development of our country but it has its disadvantages. In about 150 words,
write a composition about the advantages and disadvantages of using technology in our country. Use
real examples.
Do not sign your composition.

THE END


